1a : a means of testing : such as.
(1) : something (such as a series of questions or exercises) for measuring the skill, knowledge, intelligence, capacities, or aptitudes of an individual or group.
(2) : a procedure, reaction, or reagent used to identify or characterize a substance or constituent.
b : a positive result in such a test.
2a(1) : a critical examination, observation, or evaluation : trial specifically : the procedure of submitting a statement to such conditions or operations as will lead to its proof or disproof or to its acceptance or rejection a test of a statistical hypothesis.
(2) : a basis for evaluation : criterion.
b : an ordeal or oath required as proof of conformity with a set of beliefs.
c chiefly British : cupel.
2 : to require a doctrinal oath of.
1a : to undergo a test.
b : to be assigned a standing or evaluation on the basis of tests tested positive for cocaine the cake tested done.
2 : to apply a test as a means of analysis or diagnosis —used with for test for mechanical aptitude.
test the waters or less commonly test the water.
: to make a preliminary test or survey (as of reaction or interest) before embarking on a course of action.
1 : of, relating to, or constituting a test.
2 : subjected to, used for, or revealed by testing a test group test data.
test.
Definition of test (Entry 4 of 5).
: an external hard or firm covering (such as a shell) of many invertebrates (such as a foraminifer or a mollusk).
\ noun.
Verb.
Weekly quizzes will test your understanding of the material. The students will all be tested again at the end of the school year. The school nurse will be testing students' hearing next week. She tested positive for AIDS. The water gets tested regularly.
See More.
Noun (1).
Verb.
Adjective.
Noun (2).
History and Etymology for test.
Noun (1).
Middle English, vessel in which metals were assayed, potsherd, from Anglo-French test, tees pot, Latin testum earthen vessel; akin to Latin testa earthen pot, shell.
Noun (2).
Time Traveler for test.
The first known use of test was in the 14th century.
English Language Learners Definition of test.
: to use a set of questions or problems to measure someone's skills, knowledge, or abilities.
: to examine a part of the body or a substance taken from the body.
: to examine a small amount of water, soil, air, etc., in order to see if its quality is good, if it contains a dangerous substance, etc.
Kids Definition of test.
 (Entry 1 of 2).
1 : a set of questions or problems by which a person's knowledge, intelligence, or skills are measured.
2 : a means of finding out the nature, quality, or value of something … she told me about the illness that was the true test of her bravery.— Ellen Raskin, The Westing Game.
1 : to measure a person's knowledge, intelligence, or skills.
2 : to find out the nature, quality, or value of something.
Medical Definition of test.
 (Entry 1 of 3).
1 : a critical examination, observation, evaluation, or trial specifically : the procedure of submitting a statement to such conditions or operations as will lead to its proof or disproof or to its acceptance or rejection a test of a statistical hypothesis.
2 : a means of testing : as.
a(1) : a procedure or reaction used to identify or characterize a substance or constituent a test for starch using iodine.
(2) : a reagent used in such a test.
b : a diagnostic procedure for determining the presence or nature of a condition or disease or for revealing a change in function.
c : something (as a series of questions or exercises) for measuring the skill, knowledge, intelligence, capacities, or aptitudes of an individual or group.
3 : a result or value determined by testing.
test.
: to subject to a test.
1 : to undergo a test.
2 : to apply a test as a means of analysis or diagnosis —used with for test for the presence of starch.
Medical Definition of test (Entry 3 of 3).
1 : of, relating to, or constituting a test the test environment affected the scores.
2 : subjected to, used for, or revealed by testing test substances.
Keep scrolling for more.
Comments on test.
What made you want to look up test? Please tell us where you read or heard it (including the quote, if possible).
Get Word of the Day daily email!
Which is a synonym of desideratum?
Subscribe to America's largest dictionary and get thousands more definitions and advanced search—ad free!
OTHER MERRIAM-WEBSTER DICTIONARIES.